Practicals 1-4 (#24)
HealthBioscienceIDEAS/Medical-Image-Registration-Short-Course: episodes/practical3.Rmd

---
title: 'Exploring similarity measures for cost functions'
teaching: 10
exercises: 2
---

:::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::: questions 

> - What are the methods for calculating similarity measures?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- What measures are used to calculate similarity between two images?
```

> - How do similarity measures like SSD, MSD, NCC, and NMI differ in implementation and functionality?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- What are some commonly used similarity measures and how do they differ in implementation and functionality?
```
Wonder about including all of these acronyms before introducing them

::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::

::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::: objectives

> - Understand how similarity measures such as SSD, MSD, NCC, and NMI are calculated and used.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Understand how common similarity measures for image registration are calculated and used.
```

- Learn about the advantages and disadvantages of these metrics.

::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::

In these exercises, we use a three 2D images:

* *ct_slice_int8.png*: an axial CT slice of a head, stored as unsigned 8-bit integers.
* *ct_slice_int16.png*: the same axial slice CT slice, stored as unsigned 16-bit integers.

> * *mr_slice_int16.png*: the corresponding axial MR slice, stored as unsigned 16-bit integers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `ct_slice_int8.png`: an axial CT slice of a head, pixels are stored as unsigned 8-bit integers.
* `ct_slice_int16.png`: the same axial slice CT slice, pixels are stored as unsigned 16-bit integers.
* `mr_slice_int16.png`: the corresponding axial MR slice, pixels are stored as unsigned 16-bit integers.
```

You can find in the zipped data folder under `practical3`.

> This tutorial uses Python. There is a template Jupyter notebook for you to work on *practical3-exercises.ipynb*. You have also been provided with some utility functions in *utils.py*. When using a function from this file, you should read it and make sure you understand what it does.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This tutorial uses Python. There is a template Jupyter notebook for you to work on *practical3-exercises.ipynb*. You have also been provided with some utility functions in `utils.py`. When using a function from this file, you should read it and make sure you understand what it does.
```

## 1. Loading and displaying the images
Load the three 2D images. Display their data type and check these match the expected data types.

Convert these images to double, reorient them into 'standard orientation' and display each image in a separate figure using the `dispImage` function from *utils2.py*.

> The images should appear like this:

Reviewer: Perhaps say which image is which just in case attendees are not familiar with presentation of these different modalities.

Author: see commit 491f695

If this has been implemented correctly the image should appear to rotate clockwise, starting with a rotation of -90 degrees (so mostly being ‘off to the left’ of the original image) and finishing with a rotation of +90 degrees (so mostly being ‘off the bottom’ of the original image), as shown in the intermediate images below:

![Figure. Rotated image](fig/p3-rotated-image.png)

![Figure. Rotated image](fig/rotated_images.gif)

Make sure you understand why the image appears to rotate clockwise when the function produces an affine matrix representing an anti-clockwise rotation.

Note, the default padding value of NaN should be used when resampling the image so that pixels from outside the original images are ignored when calculating the similarity measures
below.

> ### 2.1. SSD

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### 2.1. Sum of Squared DIfferences (SSD)
```

> Edit the code so that on each iteration of the loop it calculates and stores the SSD between:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this section, we are going to observe how Sum of Squared Differences (SSD) varies between our original image and our rotated image. Edit the code so that on each iteration of the loop it calculates and stores the SSD between:
```

* 1) The original 16-bit CT image and the transformed 16-bit CT image
* 2) The original 16-bit CT image and the transformed 8-bit CT image
* 3) The original 16-bit CT image and the transformed MR image
* 4) The original 8-bit CT image and the transformed 8-bit CT image

Now rerun the cell with the for loop (you may want to comment out the lines that display the image and pause so that the code runs faster).

Plot the SSD values on the y-axis against the theta on the x-axis for each of the four cases above.

The plots should look like this:

![Figure. SSD values](fig/p3-ssd-values.png)

Note that:
* The SSD reaches a minimum (of 0) for cases 1 and 4 when the images are in alignment.
* For cases 2 and 3 SSD does not have a minimum when the images are aligned.
* For all cases the SSD decreases as the overlap between the images decreases.

> * Although the shape of the SSD curve for cases 1 and 4 is the same, the values of the SSD are different by 2 orders of magnitude.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note that:

* The SSD reaches a minimum (of 0) for cases 1 and 4 when the images are in alignment.
* For cases 2 and 3 SSD does not have a minimum when the images are aligned.
* For all cases the SSD decreases as the overlap between the images decreases.
* Although the shape of the SSD curve for cases 1 and 4 is the same, the values of the SSD are different by 2 orders of magnitude.
```
I think it needs a newline to create the list

Make sure you understand why you get these results.

> ### 2.2. MSD

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### 2.2. Mean of Squared Differences (MSD)
```

Now edit the code so that it rotates the images as above but calculates the MSD instead of the SSD at each iteration, and then plots the MSD values. 

The plots should look like this:

![Figure. MSD values](fig/p3-msd-values.png)

Note that:
* The MSD for cases 1 and 4 does not decrease as the amount of overlap decreases.
* The shape of the MSD curves for cases 1 and 4 are the same but the values are larger for case 1.

> * The MSD values for cases 2 and 3 are lower for negative values of theta and higher for positive values (this one is a bit tricky!).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note that:

* The MSD for cases 1 and 4 does not decrease as the amount of overlap decreases.
* The shape of the MSD curves for cases 1 and 4 are the same but the values are larger for case 1.
* The MSD values for cases 2 and 3 are lower for negative values of theta and higher for positive values (this one is a bit tricky!).
```

Make sure you understand why you get these results.

> ### 2.3. NCC and NMI

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### 2.3. Normalized Cross Correlation (NCC) and Normalized Mutual Information (NMI)
```

Implement the `calcNCC` function so that it calculates the Normalised Cross Correlation (NCC) between two images.

> Edit the code so that it uses your `calcNCC` function and the `calcEntropies` function from *utils2.py* to calculate the (NCC) and the joint and marginal entropies (H_AB, H_A, and H_B) instead of the MSD/SSD at each iteration. Also calculate the Mutual Information (MI) and Normalised Mutual Information (NMI) from the entropy values, and plot the results for NCC, H_AB, MI, and NMI.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Edit the code so that it uses your `calcNCC` function and the `calcEntropies` function from `utils.py` to calculate the (NCC) and the joint and marginal entropies ($H_{AB}$, $H_A$, and $H_B$) instead of the MSD/SSD at each iteration. Also calculate the Mutual Information (MI) and Normalised Mutual Information (NMI) from the entropy values, and plot the results for NCC, $H_{AB}$, MI, and NMI.
```
I see only a utils.py file in the directory - is that just an artefact from previous exercise?
